hey this is pressure Walker ditch
from India sent me this problem from the
1994 India regional mathematics Olympiad
a leaf is torn from a paperback novel
the sum of the numbers on the remaining
pages is 15,000 what are the page
numbers on the torn leaf now they're
couple notes I want to add about this
problem first a leaf means a single
sheet of paper
second the quoted problem is actual
wording from the competition but we need
to assume the book is numbered in the
usual way starting on page 1 without
skipping any pages in the original video
I posted I also overthought the problem
and I put in some assumptions that were
not there in the original wording
thankfully many of you pointed out
comments that help me correct the video
and so I can now present the correct
answer can you figure it out
give this problem a try and when you're
ready keep watching the video for a
solution
so what happens if we remove a leaf from
the book let's imagine we rip this page
from the book
well this page would have a number of X
now what would be on the opposite side
of this leaf we would have another page
number say X minus 1 in other words when
we remove a leaf from the book we're
removing two sequential pages pages
numbered X and X minus 1 from the book
suppose the book is numbered from 1 to n
the sum of all the pages in the book is
the sum of the numbers from 1 to n this
is the well-known formula n times n plus
1 all divided by 2 we know that the
total sum of all the numbers minus the
missing pages is equal to 15,000 so we
can set up an equation n times n plus 1
all over 2 minus X minus the quantity X
minus 1 this equals 15,000 now there are
two unknown variables in this equation
so we're not going to be able to solve
it in a single equation what we can do
instead is use some estimation let's
ignore the X and X minus one so we have
that n times n plus 1 all over 2 is
approximately equal to 15,000 this is
because the two page numbers will be
small relative to 15,000 we can then
estimate that n times n plus 1 is
approximately 30,000 this means N
squared is approximately 30,000 so n is
approximately the square root of 30,000
which is about 170 3.2 this is not a
whole number value so we're going to
consider the adjacent whole values well
test out N equals 173 and N equals 174
so first let's try n is equal to 174 in
that case the sum of all the pages
the book will be fifteen thousand two
hundred twenty five the two missing
pages will have the sum of two hundred
and twenty five and we can readily solve
that those will be values of x -1 is
equal to 112 and x is equal to 113 and
originally I thought that was the answer
to this problem
but as many of you pointed out and Gary
Einhorn was the first comment that I saw
who point out this mistake in the
original video if the first leaf is
numbered 1 & 2 then every leaf will have
the odd number page be 1 less than the
even page so pages 112 and 113 are not
on the same leaf so this could not be
the answer because 112 and 113 aren't on
the same physical sheet of paper so that
leaves us to consider the other
possibility what if n is equal to 173
now originally I wrongly excluded this
answer I assumed that both sides of each
leaf had to be numbered so book would
always have an even number of pages but
it is possible that the last page of a
book is blank and not numbered that
doesn't contradict anything in the
original wording of the problem and this
is a pretty tricky problem and that's
why it's an Olympia problem so what if n
is equal to 173 then the sum of all the
page numbers is equal to 15,000 51 this
means the two pages would have a sum of
51 and then we can readily solve that
those two pages will be 25 and 26 so
this is the correct answer to the
problem did you figure it out thanks for
watching this video please subscribe to
my channel I make videos on math you can
catch me on my blog mind your decisions
if you like this video you can check out
my books which are listed in the video
description and you can support me on
patreon if you have a math topic you can
email me presh and mind your decisions
calm and you can catch me on social
media either at mind your decisions or a
pressure Locker